Visualizing food security in Canada’s north


The Canadian North is a vast expanse of mostly uninhabited tundra and ice, accounting for almost forty percent of the country’s land mass. Though remote and often isolated from the rest of the country, the inhabitants of Canada’s North represent an important piece of Canadian identity, culture and economy. The mostly Aboriginal population who resides in communities above the 60th parallel is a resilient community which faces unique difficulties as a result of their location. The presence of food insecurity in Canada is an issue across all provinces and territories, but especially the North. The disparity in the prevalence of food insecurity in the North compared to the South is staggering; surveys of Nunavut have reported as much as triple the amount of food insecurity among households as some provinces. This heightened insecurity in financial and physical access to the necessary food coincides with similarly elevated health and social disparities between Northerners and the general population of Canada. Food insecurity has implications on physical and mental health and wellbeing for adults, but even more so for children and their development. Also at risk is the preservation of Aboriginal traditions. The southern movement of younger generations combined with environmental factors and a shift towards market and imported diets among Aboriginal peoples is leading towards a serious cultural loss. Though the severity of the situation has been addressed through various studies, reports and government funding, there is still a downward trend when it comes to food security in Canada, and especially the North. The pattern of vulnerability therefore needs to be further addressed. A state of awareness needs to be broadened in order to provide adequate regulatory action towards the resolution of food insecurity and its implication on northern residents. This study will provide a unique look at life in the Canadian North, while advocating for a serious human rights issue currently affecting the area.
Premises
There are many government agencies, organizations and funds focused on the health and wellbeing of Canadians affected by food insecurity. The Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) has been collecting national data on food insecurity since 2004 through its annual Household Food Security Survey Module. The collection of the data, while optional for individual provinces and territories, provides a detailed glance at the situations in which food insecurity is occurring. Although efforts have been made to address issues of food security made known through this data collection, the past years have shown an increase in food security in almost all participating provinces and territories, especially the territories. If the methods currently in place to address and remedy this situation are not proving successful, what further can be done to increase the state of awareness, and further, provide positive action? Can more beneficial attention and action be brought to this issue through the visualization of the data? What insights can be generated through visualizing the data? The opportunity to visualize the data in a compelling narrative may provide a unique opportunity to highlight food insecurity in the Canadian North, the factors contributing to the issue, and the implications it has on the Canadian people.
Cultural & historical background
The population of Northern Canada has historically been an Aboriginal population. Though remote community locations make the availability of market and imported food logistically difficult, the Aboriginal peoples who inhabit the North have traditionally supplemented their diets through traditional hunting and gathering. Many factors, including environmental changes, improved transportation methods and—most significantly—the systematic disempowerment of Aboriginal traditions, have caused Aboriginal populations to become less reliant on the land for food. In addition to this phenomenon, factors such as the market (retail) food system, environmental warming and rights and governance all play a role in the development of an insecure food environment in Northern Canada. While “many initiatives have addressed the food insecurity of northern Aboriginal peoples, including federal food mail programs (from the 1960s to 2011), [and] food subsidy programs such as Nutrition North Canada” (4, Aboriginal Food Security in Northern Canada), the issue still persists. 
Audience
The implications and goals of this study are directed at multiple audiences. The obvious audience is individuals in positions of power in terms of regulation and governance surrounding this issue; Members of Parliament in the affected areas who are advocating for federal attention and resources; policy makers at the federal level who are in charge of the distribution of such resources. In addition, attention should be given to the affected individuals themselves. The issues being faced by Northern residents in relation to food security give them unique, first-hand insights into what processes are beneficial, which are not, and where the gaps remain for additional support. The idea of food sovereignty is therefore integral to this investigation.
Methods
Both qualitative and quantitative considerations are integral to framing the full and complex issue of Northern food insecurity. Food insecurity can be examined in the context of many contributing factors, which will be divided into qualitative and quantitative considerations as follows:
Qualitative considerations include
demographics of affected individuals, 
cultural and traditional practices,
regulatory issues and governance,
market/retail food system data (logistics of transportation, etc.),
and environmental changes.
Quantitative considerations include
food insecurity numbers (by province and territory),
comparison to average household size (number of family adults, children),
comparison to average household income (type/$),
market/retail food system data (food cost),
and environmental changes.
The data sources include the results from the CCHS Food Security Survey Module, as well as supplementary data collected through other Statistics Canada surveys. As suggested above, the main food insecurity data will be visualized against demographic data and data from other contributing factors. The relationships and patterns from the treatment of the data will ultimately provide an interface that can foster insights into the handling of food insecurity in the North. 
